Understanding and Mitigating Phishing Attacks in
the Digital Era
Kanika Im-erb
School of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics,
National Forensic Sciences University
Gandhinagar, Gujarat (India)
Abstract— In the present-day era the internet, mobile
devices, and other digital communications are critically
important in people’s lives. With the development of
technology, more and more people reveal personal
information in internet, intentionally or not intentionally.
Phishing is a very dangerous type of cybercrime that
encompasses high risks of security threats for the simple
reason of fooling users and stealing valuable information.
Such attacks seek to collect Personally Identifiable
Information (PII) like names, addresses and phone
numbers, and Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information
(SPII) including, financial information, biometrics, and
login credentials. Phishing can be carried through the
following media: e-mail, electronic mobile phone
messaging- SMS, social sites, cellular that include mobile
networks, other forms of communication, and technology
innovation such as artificial intelligence. Especially in the
study, on identifying their techniques and preventive
measures for these attacks such as MFA and cybersecurity
awareness training, to the users.
Keywords— phishing; Personally Identifiable
Information (PII); Sensitive Personally Identifiable
Information (SPII); prevention strategies; multi-factor
authentication (MFA); cybersecurity awareness training.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cybercrime has become serious harms and mentally
affecting people in today's digital age, causing significant harm
and distress This is because the criminals are able to access their
intended victims through multiple avenues that range from the
social page, instant SMS, cell phone and e-mail. Thus,
scammers may present themselves as representatives of
government bodies or from other legal-talking organizations.
The most continuous threat is phishing attack which targets
individuals to get relevant data such as PII and SPII. Such types
of attacks affect not only behavioral profiles of human but also
the actual technical infrastructure, and they pose a very realistic
threat to both safety and privacy.
Phishing is a type of internet fraud where the attacker
disguises themselves with an intention of having the targeted
person perform a certain action [9]. There are different types of
phishing: It can be categorized as email phishing, SMS/MMS
phishing, social networking phishing, cellular network
phishing, and phishing based on new age technologies such as
Artificial Intelligence. In phishing, the phishers use other
methods of social engineering to compel the users to go to other
sites that would require them to fill in a form with a login name
and password after receiving an email complete with a link [1].
These attacks are very effecting and apart from making
individual lose their money they had many implications at the
national economy level. But at social level the change is equally
dramatic; the individuals, who become targets of the phishing
attacker, have moderate levels of stress [4].
The objective of this paper is therefore to publicly describe
a multifaceted prevention strategy based on an analysis of
methods used in phishing. Some protection measures considered
are MFA, real time monitoring, and awareness training. Studies
show that they have a very strong potential of reducing the
incidence of phishing, and therefore play a part in enhancing a
safer context for the digital era.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The latest technologies such as smart phone, cloud
computing and social sites are new forms of hyperconnectivity
[3]. In the present world the use of digital communication is
much simpler and convenient and by following this it is

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 2 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
possible that the teams can complete their projects from any
region quite effectively. But this digitization has its
consequence which is as follows: One of the biggest concerns
is that it has created a new avenue for cyber criminals to
perpetrate phishing scams. As with many things related to the
internet, these attacks can occur at any time and any place and
can thus affect any person. The consequences of these attacks
are far reaching a result of which not only do people lose their
hard-earned money but also has implications for the economy
at the national level.
A. Phishing
Phishing is a type of electronically delivered social
engineering attack in which a perpetrator, often posing as a
legitimate entity such as fraudulent emails, text messages, phone
calls or websites attempts to obtain sensitive information. from
an unsuspecting individual or to infect their device with malware
[2,5].
Fig. 1. Diagram of a phishing attack [3].
Typically, in the phishing attack, the perpetrator
impersonates someone the victim knows and trusts, or a member
of the government, or a representative from a reputable
company. The hacker sends a message to the victim informing
him or her to make a payment, download an invoice, click on the
link or perform any activity. That attachment could infect the
user’s device with ransomware, and that link could take the user
to a site with the express purpose of capturing Personally
Identifiable Information (SPII) like credit card information,
banking information, login credentials and name, address, phone
number, e-mail address, and date of birth. Further, it could hit
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (SPII) such as
financial data, biometric, login credentials or passport/national
Identity card [14]. Most attackers target users with no
ethics/digital/cyber ethic or those that are inexperienced in
addition to targeting technical weaknesses [1]. Different
methods are being employed by the attacker either to trick the
victim into answering or losing attention through a con or an
informal way to inject a payload for gaining confidential and
individual details from the victim. These are the common
methods used in phishing:
1. QR code Phishing
Recently since increase in touchless services such as
restaurant menus, flight check-ins that uses QR code, QR
code phishing or quashing is a new social engineering
phishing attack that has been created cunningly to entice its
recipient to scan the QR code [9]. Another method that
attackers use is that they develop their own QR codes and
then place them on different websites, in e-mails, and the like
and make the victims scan them. This may cause the
recipients to visit sites hosting malware and the attackers will
be allowed immediate access to the targets’ information.
However, the protection is to ensure that you verify the
source of the QR code, and do not scan codes in emails, or
stickers in public places. The option which you probably
could use is an input of the URL directly into the address line
if it is possible.
2.Smishing Phishing
SMS phishing, or "smishing," scammers will send SMS text
messages with links or attachments [8]. claiming to be sent
from a credible organization or company attempt to steal the
victims private or financial information. Smishing it is a
form of social engineering. This manipulates psychology,
playing on emotions such as fear, trust, and confusion, to
manipulate victims to follow the scammer plan and attempt
to steal the victim’s personal information.
3.Email Phishing
The most conventional styles of phishing are contained in
this classification, with phishing email, which dates to the
1990s, as its oldest type. Hackers forward these emails to any
electronic mail address that they possibly can [8,10]. Their
style of writing rhymes with that of legitimate company’s
emails; they can be in form of fake bank emails, fake
shipping company emails, or fake emails from other ecommerce companies. Further, the attempts to press the user
into action by making them hurried will also be an effort by
the attackers that attempts to steal the victims’ personal and
financial information. In addition, it is important to know
that while protection from email phishing can be nearly
impossible, yet the consideration of these principles will
greatly lower the probability of being targeted by such kind
of phishing well, that legitimate companies or official

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 3 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
organizations will never request any information through email.
4. Search Engine Phishing
Search engine phishing have also been referred to as SEO
poisoning or SEO Trojans – these are conditions where
hackers ensure that they are on top of the search list which
makes people believe in the legitimation of the website [10].
Once they enter, they may be deceived into providing
sensitive data in exchange for fake incentives, unknowingly
becoming victims in the process. attacker can make sites that
look like any other legal site, but the favorite target is in
banking, money transfer, social networks and shopping sites.
5. Social Media Phishing
Due to the massive display of personal details via social
media, it becomes simpler for attackers to initiate social
engineering attacks to gain restricted data. Such attacks
normally come in form of a link that could redirect one to an
undesirable website to harvest information from [8]. Today
such sites have moved to being used for other than personal
as the Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, and LinkedIn for
networking among others hence there is an expanded attack
surface for phishing. With the help of typed attacks, Attacker
can build-up fake websites, through which it is possible to
steal essential data [8]. These networking social sites have
today evolved from being personal uses such as Facebook,
Instagram, snapchat, and LinkedIn for networking also
exposes users to increased phishing incidences.
6) Vishing
Vishing short for voice phishing, refers to fraudulent phone
calls or voice messages in which the attacker pretends to be
someone the victim knows or any other trusted source the
victim deals with to trick victim to providing sensitive
information, like login credentials, credit card numbers, or
bank details.
7) Whaling
A whaling attack targets the “big fish” [18]. Whaling is the
type of phishing the attacker aims at a wealthy and powerful
status of the victim or user. Whaling attacks are particularly
dangerous because they exploit individuals with access to a
lot of power and sensitive information.
8) Man-in-the-middle (MitM)
In the Man-in-the-middle attack, fraudsters insidiously
intercept messages passed between a user and a genuine
website and then capture details without the user’s consent
[4]. The main objective for conducting the attack is to obtain
personal information.
B. Vishing
Vishing is referred to as voice phishing, this means
using social engineering over the telephone system to either
get a person to disclose their log-in details, credit card
numbers, bank details etc. [6,7]. They always put on an
emergency camera to make us feel pressured. For instance,
posing as a bank and informing us about the unauthorized
activity on our account, and inviting us to verify our SPII. Or
create a news breaking situation with a huge cash offer for
instance, informing us we’ve won a special prize only to
require us to pay a deposit. A large number of people do not
have knowledge of such scams in advance and have even
provided information voluntarily, thinking that they are
being legitimate. Phishing in 2022 was ranked second most
popular among the type of data breaches that infected
organizations with an average cost of US$4.91 million per
breach [6]. These are the example of vishing that commonly
found in today life:
1. AI-based Vishing
Over the past few years AI has experienced considerable
development and integration into many fields and has
influenced everyday life. AI, in its simplest terms, operates
based on examining data and making decisions based on that
data. Now AI programs can generate voice like a human,
generate fake videos, alter photos and thus can easily deceive
people. A form of AI is used to fake the company director’s
voice and through a phone call, discuss the acquisition
process and get the consent of the bank manager to transfer
$35 million [11]. AI can perform a deep voice technology to
mimic the speech, voice and melodious tones of an executive
to pull of a cyber-attack. As voice patterns are available
easily in social media, YouTube, interview recording, etc.,
all organizations are in a great danger from AI [11, 12].
2. Caller ID Spoofing
Caller ID spoofing is a case where an ID of a caller is
falsified so that it will appear that the person calling is from
a genuine company, say a government agency, the scammer
then tries to manipulate the victim by pretending to be
someone they know well.
3. Tech Support Call
This is type of attack can happen through receiving a link
when a page pops up telling the user that a problem has been
found wit their computer, then a number needs to be called
for technical support [12]. It is important they do not fall for

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 4 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
these attacks and the way to do this is through education.
Others include: As often as possible tell the users that they
will never receive a call from this platform requesting for the
password or for that matter, they should never provide it
[11].
4. Credit card debt scam
The scammer calls and pretends to be an employee from the
bank, claiming that the victim's credit card bill is overdue;
the system, therefore, will debit the specified amount from a
victim's bank account and close it for them. The victims most
often do not know that they are moving money from their
bank accounts directly to those of the scammer. Instead of
being of help, the fraud financier takes the service fee and
illegally steals some information to make unauthorized
charges or even commit identity theft.
5.Drug trafficking/ money laundering accusation scam
In this type of scam, fraudsters try to panic victims to get
money or sensitive information by accusing the victim of
being involved in illicit activities, drug trafficking, or money
laundering. Then, the fraudster switches the call over to a
second fraudster, who pretends to act as a police officer to
help investigate the case, and then advises the victim to put
money in a different account temporarily [13].
6. Delivery scams
In this approach to gain access, scammers can masquerade
as representatives from Amazon or UPS and would call
customers about purported shipping issues concerning these
non-existing orders [6]. Once contact is established with the
customer, the scammers may request sensitive information,
such as address or phone number, claiming it is necessary to
complete delivery.
C. Phishing versus Spear Phishings
Often, the terms phishing and spear phishing are used
interchangeably. However, there is a key distinction between
these two types of attacks [4]. Phishing and Spear Phishing are
both types of social engineering, where the attacker's goal is to
steal money, gain access to sensitive data, including login
information, or install malware on the victim's device [2,4].
Under such a scheme, the attacker gathers information about the
victim, either as a Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or
Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (SPII).
A phishing attack relies on a social engineering effort where
the hacker creates a counterfeit communication that appears
legitimate and comes from a trusted source. Normally, the
attacker poses to be a trusted organization (e.g., banks,
governmental agencies, and credible agencies) such that it lures
the victim to fake websites or requests downloading malicious
attachments.
A Spear Phishing this cybernetic criminal are thinking of
targeting people with whom they have the closest associations
[2]. In case of attacks such as these, the attackers can gain
information on their victim through their social media activity.
The spear phishing is directed at a much more limited group,
sometimes consisting of just one or a few people. With this
strategy, the hackers can perform research and craft the email
messages in a way that abuses a victim’s information and makes
victim seem believable [4]. The phishing perpetrators use such
details to create messages containing, in many instances, many
finely tuned personal bits of information designed to let the
target consider the message as having a high degree of
credibility [5]. Often the goals include accessing sensitive
company data or financial accounts, securing personal
information, or attempting to install extremely sophisticated
malware or take control of systems with zero access attention.
Additionally, phishing attacks can come through a variety
of channels, including compromised websites, social media,
fake ads, email, and text messages [2].
D. What Leads to Phishing Attacks
Phishing attacks are all too often successful since a
combination of human psychology and technological
vulnerabilities keeps people unaware of how to properly
safeguard their data. In most cases, a phishing attack has an
overall goal to collect best sensitive data like passwords and
logins from victims to be able to access the target network or
establishment [15]. For Phishing attacks, they were still
among the main threats that, coupled with the carelessness
of many organizations in not instituting effective measures
to counter these attacks, thanks to several issues that include:
1.Insufficient and ineffective cybersecurity
investments. Many organizations still operate outdated or
insufficient protections against more and more complex and
evolving threats [2].
2.Personnel training shortcomings. Often,
organizations leave their employees defenseless against
phishing e-mails by failing to provide appropriate training
and regularly update them on potential risks [2]. An example
is key signs to recognize phishing in email.
• Unknown suspicious sender address
• Generic greetings, phishing emails often use generic
phrases like “Dear customer” instead of your name.

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 5 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
• Urgent or emotionally appealing language, especially
messages that claim dire consequences for not
responding immediately [16].
• Suspicious Links. Untrusted shortened URLs [16].
• Offers that seem too good to be true (e.g., large sums
of money or unrealistic prizes).
• Fraudulent requests for private information. Minimum
standards require law-abiding organizations to never
solicit individual information via email.
• Mistakes in logos, fonts, or colors are a good indication
of a fishing email coming from a trusted company.
• Poor grammar or spelling errors [16].
3. A susceptible security status. One of the most important
things is monitoring traffic internal or external to any
enterprise. Network traffic has increasingly become
encrypted, leading to decreased visibility, making it a lot
harder for enterprise IT administrators to track anything that
happens on networks [2].
E. The Phishing Attack Process
The phishing attack consists of several phases, and the
perpetrators mainly employ social engineering methods to
extract sensitive data from victims:
1. Target Identification
The attacker's task is to identify a target through the gaining
of intelligence on the targets, an individual, group, or
organization [17]. This process includes gathering
information about a victim's work, interests, or habits so that
it can look plausible enough to conduct a successful
phishing attempt. This can be achieved by observing social
media profiles or other online happenings [4].
2. Weaponization
Once vulnerabilities are identified based on this
information, the attacker builds a plan for the attack [2]. An
attack message mimicking a trusted source (e.g., a bank,
company, or government agency).
3. The Delivery of the Phishing Message
The mode of delivery of the phishing message is chosen by
the attacker, who uses compromised websites, social media,
fake ads, emails, or text messages. Usually, the message
includes a malicious link, an attachment, or a request for
sensitive information.
4. Engaging the Victim
After victim to action, such as clicking a malicious link,
downloading an attachment, enters information on the fake
website, or replying with sensitive information (passwords,
financial information, etc.), the attacker collects sensitive
data or if the victim opens a malicious attachment, their
device might get infected with malware, which could lead
to further exploitation of their personal data.
5. Exploitation
The attackers steal the credentials and the personal data
through the fake portals to which the victims have been
directed [2]. This step has Attackers in exploiting the
victim's actions to achieve the attacker's goals.
III. PREVENTION OF PHISHING ATTACK
With the increase of internet usage, phishing attacks have
also grown, causing significant risks to individuals and
organizations. cyber criminals can use numerous tactics by
which they would attempt to obtain essential identity attributes
[19] in the form of PII or SPII more commonly through phishing
or faux websites. As we type an email, make an online purchase,
withdrawing money through an ATM, or sending money to a
friend, we become vulnerable to facing a phishing attempt
because phishing is not in one form or the other. It is important
to especially familiarize ourselves with the various types of
phishing attacks and how best to avoid them. Some of them are
described in the further sections of the paper.
1.Security Awareness Training
Educating employees on how to identify the different
phishing emails, links and or other warning signs, and aware
of click on links and open attachments from unknown
sender. It is also important to perform weak imitation of
attacks referred to as phishing to support the training.
Provide employees with a secure environment to assess their
phishing expertise through training and phishing simulations
[18].
2. Anti-spam software tools
In email phishing, anti-spam software tools able to block
suspicious emails that suspect to be a spam email [1]. Antispam software tools are the application software that is used
to identify, filter, and block spam emails from ever getting
into a user’s mailbox. mails often are full of unwanted
content, take time to go through and sometimes contain links
to phishing or contain some form of malware; thus, anti-

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 6 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
spam helps in dealing with such spam email. It applies
algorithms to rate emails considering different features to
select spam emails. For example, email authentication
methods like SPF, DKIM, and DMARC records verify
where the email from [21].
3. Do not share personal information
Do not share any of your identity information e.g. social
security numbers, financial details, passwords, address etc.
to anyone including friends and other trusted personnel and
recall that the majorities of the company will not request our
personal data via email.
4. Active web monitoring
Web monitoring protects against phishing by constantly
scanning the sites’ logos, trademarks or content and alerting
when they appear on a malicious website [20]. When
identified, businesses are informed to act, such as ordering
those sites to shut down, and spam filters can target such
emails containing a link to such sites. It is less possible for
user to gain access to such sites. However, because
takedowns may take a while, phishing sites may still get the
user data that they want before the sites are pulled down.
Although this minimizes phishing it does not eradicate it
completely as some sites remain active long enough to
pollute before being remediated [1].
5. Examine URLs and Links Carefully
Never enter your details, clicking on suspicious link or open
the attachments check the address bar. Different domain
names should also be checked to see if they are similar but
fake-looking websites. Avoid Clicking Links in unsolicited
emails, do not directly click links rather follow the link by
directly entering the URL of the organization’s website.
6. Authentication and authorization
Authentication and authorization are the technique by verify
the legitimate users by only allowing legitimate users
perform some activities or gain admission to specific
information. Authentication verifies the identity of a user,
authentication comes in three forms; single-factor that
requires only username and password to access a situation or
perform specific actions. The second one is two-factor
authentication which in additional to the username and
password such as OTP which is send to the email id of the
user or mobile number. The third type is multi-factor
authentication using more than one form of identity (i.e., a
combination of something you know, something you are,
and something you have) [1]. Authorization determines what
a user is permitted to do even after they have logged in. It
restricts the access to perform certain operations or to certain
areas depending on the user’s authority level.
7. Anti-Virus Scanning
The company can prevent a large amount of harmful code
from reaching the network by filtering email and web traffic
at the network boundary (gateway) ensuring that phishing do
no harm to the system [20]. Anti-Virus Scanning detecting
and blocking suspicious links, attachment, URLs, or email.
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The research methodology of this study on understanding and
preventing phishing attacks in a digital world consists of the
following steps:
1) Literature Review:
• In the research that was focusing on the analyze
different technical present on the various types of
phishing attack and the mechanism used in the
different types of the attack including emailing
phishing, whaling, smishing, vishing, new attack type
such as QR code phishing or AI vishing.
• Recognizing Phishing Objective: The aim of phishing
is to steal sensitive personal information, such as
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and Sensitive
Personally Identifiable Information (SPII), by
exploiting flaws in both technology and human nature.
• In terms of the existing data sources, the project has
used reports from several authorities, websites, and
scholarly publications to contextualize phishing
trends.
2) Phishing Attack Analysis:
• Today, the analyzed phishing cases help to classify the
approaches used by the attackers. These include:
o An impersonation approach: it pretends to be
government officer or a legitimate
organization.
o Exploiting human psychological and social
engineering techniques.
o Delivery mechanisms include fake emails,
SMS, fake website, or newly technology like
QR code and AI.

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 7 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
• The stage of the attack is steps involving target
identification, weaponization, delivery, engagement
of the victim and exploitation.
3) Phishing Preventive Strategies:
• To against phishing attacks, this research focusing on:
o Awareness Training: Training, that would
help users distinguish between spam emails,
links and messages.
o Technological Tools: Assessing anti-spam
solutions, real time monitoring solutions and
various forms of authentication, MFA etc.
o Behavioral Countermeasures: those focusing
on user awareness, educated about phishing
and avoiding sharing sensitive information.
4) Data Collection and Case Studies:
Data was collected from publicly available phish-related
incidents, website, scholarly publications and case studies that
would explain common practices by an attacker and how to
avoid phishing in real life.
5) Ethical Considerations:
All the gathered and analyzed information meet ethical
requirements regarding the privacy and confidentiality of
individuals affected by phishing incidents.
V. RESULTS
The research elaborately discusses the types,
techniques, and countermeasures to phishing attacks. Using
tables and figures, it aids in summarizing the findings as
concisely as possible.
1) Method used in Phishing Attacks
Ref Phishing Method Characteristics
[8,10] Email Phishing A fake email posing as a bank
or an e-commerce platform.
[8] Smishing Messages containing urgent
demands.
Vishing Phone calls made to
impersonate either banks or
government officer.
[8]
Social Media
Phishing
Links sent from unknown
accounts or seems to be fake
accounts or hacked profiles
[9]
QR Code Phishing Fraudulent QR codes used to
lead targets to malwareinfected websites.
[18]
Whaling The attacker aims at a wealthy
and powerful victim.
[10]
Search Engine
Phishing
Hackers ensure that they are
on top of the search lists to
convince people of the
legitimacy of the website.
2) Attack Phases
Phishing attacks typically follow a structured sequence,
including target identification, weaponization, delivery, victim
engagement, and exploitation.
Fig. 2. How phishing works [18]
3) Psychological, Behavioral, and Financial Impacts
• Psychological and Behavioral Impacts: Phishing
attack victims face emotional distress to a significant
level. They may feel betrayed and their sense of
control over the situation violates. Moreover, victims
also face anxiety about their private information being
compromised this may lead to serious condition such
as depression or social anxiety.
• Financial Losses: Phishing attack leads to financial
loss for individuals and also in organization or impact
to national-level.

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 8 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
4) Preventive Strategies
Ref
Prevention
Method and
description
Advantages Disadvantages
[18]
Security
Awareness
Training: Scans
for and blocks
harmful content
such as
suspicious
links,
attachments, or
malware.
Diminishes
the
susceptibility
to phishing
and Increases
vigilance of
employees.
Requires
regular updates
and effective
according to
employee
collaboration.
[1,20]
Anti-Spam
Software Tools:
Identifying,
filtering, and
blocking spam
emails so that
they don't reach
users.
Stops most
phishing
emails
automatically
and reduces
time waste by
filtering spam.
May reduce the
bug and
blocking fake
emails.
[20]
Do Not Share
Personal Info:
Advises users to
avoid sharing
their private
data.
Quick and free
to operate,
increases the
privacy of
your personal
data.
Can only solve
part of the
phishing.
Active Web
Monitoring:
Constantly
scanning
malicious
websites to
identify the
misuse
associated with
the company.
Proactively
identifies
dangerous
sites, early
prevention
from further
compromise
Protection
against instant
damage not
guaranteed,
delays in the
takedown of
phishing sites.
[1,20]
Examine URLs
and Links:
Recommends
that URLs be
typed in rather
than clicked on.
These
methods
would help
with
preventing
one from
malevolent
websites.
They require
great care and
understanding
the URL
structure.
[1]
Authentication
and
Authorization:
Identity is
confirmed by
the application
of one-factor,
two-factor, or
multi-factor
authentication
mechanisms.
enhancing
security and
unauthorized
access.
Implementation
could be
complicated
and can be
rather
inconvenient
for users.
[20]
Anti-Virus
Scanning: Scan
and block
attempts to
introduce any
harmful
content, such as
suspicious
links,
attachments, or
malware.
Provides
sound defense
mechanisms
against
malicious
computer
code,
automatically
prevents
unsafe file
attachment
openings and
URL access.
May impose
strain on system
performance.
The phishing attacks, including email phishing,
smishing, vishing, and newer methods such as QR codes, AI
and social media phishing, are explained in detail, and they
follow a structured process that exploits human vulnerabilities
such as urgency and fear. Emerging methods such as AIenabled voice cloning are becoming more terrified. Preventive
measures such as multi-factor authentication does help in a way
to reduce the risk, awareness training as well as anti-spam tools.
Each of the studies demands pro-active more so responsive
approaches to counter the new and escalating threats associated
with phishing in digital era.
VI. CONCLUSION
Phishing cases continue to be a significant issue in the
current technologically advanced world and the attacks are
delivered to users and organizations with various innovative
attack vectors. This work looks at the fact that phishing exploit
people’s weaknesses, including trust, urgency, and fear, besides
the technological vulnerability. Modern examples such as AI
operated vishing and QR code phishing show how attackers are
expanding as technology changes.

NFSU – Journal of Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
Volume – 1, Issue – 1 October 2024
Page 9 of 9
DOI - xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx https://jcsdf.nfsu.ac.in/
The results indicate that a combination of several tiers of
preventive measures is crucial for control and prevention. From
them, the most effective prevention solutions include MultiFactor Authentication, Awareness Training, and Anti-Spam
tools. However, the best strategy is to engage in user education,
investing in better technologies for analysis, as well as
instituting strong monitoring for threats by combining and
outsmarting the attackers.
This research thus highlights the need to increase individual
and organizational awareness and readiness to future cyber
threats. Denial of phishing attacks and proper control of
interactivity in cyberspace is possible as a result of the
application of adaptive measures and placing attention to
cybersecurity.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Shaikh and Z. Zeba, "Phishing Attacks: A Recent Comprehensive
Study and a New Anatomy," Frontiers in Computer Science, vol. 3, no.
563060, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomp.2021.563060/full.
[2] G. Bridges, C. Hauman, A. Tomei, and G. Velda Umapathi, "Phishing for
Dummies: Cases Special Edition," 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/products/security/phishingdummies-ebook.pdf
[3] Cloudflare. What is a phishing attack? [Online]. Available:
https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/access-management/phishingattack/
[4] “Phishing versus Spear Phishing,” 2020. Available:
https://www.sutcliffeinsurance.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2020/03/Phishing-Attacks-Guide.pdf
[5] Ibm, “Phishing,” What is phishing?, May 17, 2024.
Available: https://www.ibm.com/topics/phishing
[6] “Secure Email Threat Defense demo,” Cisco. Oct. 30, 2024. Available:
https://www.cisco.com/site/us/en/learn/topics/security/what-isvishing.html#:~:text=Vishing%2C%20short%20for%20voice%20phishi
ng%2C%20refers%20to%20fraudulent%20phone%20calls,card%20num
bers%2C%20or%20bank%20details
[7] AFP Core Values: Honor, Service, Patriotism, A F P Vision 2028: A
world-class armed forces, source of national pride. Available:
shttps://www.afp.mil.ph/images/PDF/Cyber%20Bulletin/2020/2020-
11%20VISHING%20SCAM.pdf
[8] K. Chin, “19 Most common types of phishing attacks in 2024 | UpGuard,”
www.upguard.com, Sep. 16, 2024. Available:
https://www.upguard.com/blog/types-of-phishing-attacks
[9] S. Campanella, “What is quishing (QR code phishing)?,” WhatIs, Sep. 19,
2024. Available: https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/QR-codephishing
[10] “What are the different types of phishing?,” Trend Micro. Available:
https://www.trendmicro.com/en_th/what-is/phishing/types-ofphishing.html
[11] Terranova Security, “8 examples of vishing and how to beat them,”
Terranova Security, Oct. 02, 2023. Available:
https://www.terranovasecurity.com/blog/examples-vishing
[12] I. Blog and I. Blog, “What is a Vishing Attack? [Definition, examples and
protection tips],” Incognia, Feb. 01, 2023. Available:
https://www.incognia.com/the-authentication-reference/what-is-vishingattack-definition-examples-and-tips-to-protect-from-it
[13] Kasikorn Bank, “Call Center Gang” Kasikorn Bank. Available:
https://www.kasikornbank.com/en/personal/Digitalbanking/KBankCyberRisk/Pages/callcentergang.html
[14] “ICCWS 2020 15th International Conference on Cyber Warfare and
Security,” Google Books. Available:
https://books.google.co.in/books?hl=en&lr=&id=ZKDYDwAAQBAJ&
oi=fnd&pg=PA402&dq=pii+and+spii+comparison&ots=RvFts4MgJj&s
ig=aKrzOl4uP6p0qBjPKlYQxg4lmmI&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=pii
%20and%20spii%20comparison&f=false
[15] “Why do phishing attacks happen? | Next DLP blog,” Why do phishing
attacks happen?, Jun. 24, 2024. Available:
https://www.nextdlp.com/resources/blog/why-do-phishing-attackshappen
[16] “Recognize and Report Phishing | CISA,” Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency CISA. Available:
https://www.cisa.gov/secure-our-world/recognize-and-report-phishing
[17] E. Woods, “The three stages of a phishing attack - bait, hook and catch,”
The Three Stages Of a Phishing Attack - Bait, Hook And Catch, Aug. 11,
2021. Available: https://blog.usecure.io/three-steps-of-phishing
[18] Shanice, “Complete Guide to Phishing: Techniques & Mitigations -
Valimail,” Valimail -, Jun. 05, 2024. Available:
https://www.valimail.com/resources/guides/guide-to-phishing/
[19] A. Simister, “10 ways to prevent phishing attacks,” Lepide Blog: A Guide
to IT Security, Compliance and IT Operations, Jun. 21, 2024. Available:
https://www.lepide.com/blog/10-ways-to-prevent-phishing-attacks/
[20] G. Tally, R. Thomas, T. Van Vleck, and McAfee Research, “AntiPhishing: best practices for institutions and consumers,” McAfee
Research – McAfee, Inc., Technical Report # 04-004, Sep. 2004.
Available: https://docs.apwg.org/sponsors_technical_papers/AntiPhishing_Best_Practices_for_Institutions_Consumer0904.pdf
[21] Cloudflare, Inc., How to Prevent Phishing. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/email-security/how-to-prevent